Introduction
============

Whether taking a photo in real life or rendering a virtual scene,
lighting has a big part in the aesthetics of the final image. In this
tutorial, I will show you the basics of lighting and materials in the
Virtual World Sandbox.

This tutorial assumes that you know how to find, log into, and navigate
the Sandbox website, and that you know the basic camera controls and
navigation in-world. You do NOT need any knowledge of lighting
techniques, that’s what this tutorial is for! |:)|

First, a brief disclaimer. By default, new Sandbox scenes are very
brightly illuminated. Since it is hard to be subtle at full brightness,
I have turned all the scene lights way down for all the screenshots in
this tutorial. See the `Scene lighting <#Scene-lighting>`__ section for
information on how to do this.

Lights
------

Lights in the VW Sandbox behave close to what you’d expect from a light
in the real world: they illuminate the scene in specific ways, depending
on the type of light. The specifics will be covered in the following
sections, but all lights are created in the same way. From the *Create*
menu, select *Lights*, and choose the type of light you are looking for.
It will spawn at the center of your screen.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/add_light_menu.png
   :alt: Creating Lights

   Creating Lights

**Note:** Lighting nodes cannot be selected by the rubber band selector
(drag-clicking). You must either click on the light bulb icon in the
scene or select the light from the Hierarchy tab to select.

**Note:** Currently only the sun will cast shadows, though this may
change in the future.

There are three types of lighting in the Sandbox: point lights,
directional lights, and spot lights. There is also a special case: scene
lights. I will cover this first.

Scene lighting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Before you begin customizing the lighting in your world, I recommend you
turn down the global lighting a bit. You can do this by selecting the
scene:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/select_scene.png
   :alt: Select scene

   Select scene

And opening the Properties panel by either clicking the button on the
top or the tab on the side:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/finding_properties_panel.png
   :alt: Scene properties

   Scene properties

Click on the “scene” section at the bottom of that tab. There are some
nice cosmetic scene properties here. In particular, notice the Sun
Color, Sun Intensity, and Sun Direction properties. Together they
describe a directional light (more on this later). Feel free to play
with these settings until you like the result. Note that these settings
only affect the light as it falls on objects and creates shadows, and do
not change the apparent position of the sun in the sky.

You cannot change the position of the sun in the sky *per se*, but you
can change the way the sky looks. On that same scene properties tab,
look for the Sky Texture property. You can change this to one of a
variety of textures, from solid black/white to skies at different times
of day. Again, experiment until you find something you like.

**Note:** As of this writing, there is no way to upload your own custom
sky texture. However, this will likely be added in the future.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/scene_lighting.png
   :alt: Scene lighting settings

   Scene lighting settings

One final important property on this tab is the Ambient property. This
sets the minimum amount of illumination an object can receive. Note that
this is not really a color, but a magnitude. Keeping this greyscale is
recommended for convenience and clarity. The below image shows a
side-by-side of a low-ambient and high-ambient scene.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/ambient_intensity.png
   :alt: Scene ambient

   Scene ambient

With all this in mind, you are now ready to actually begin lighting your
scene.

Point lights
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a basic type of light that originates at a particular point in
the scene and radiates out spherically from that point. You would use
this type of light to model something like a light bulb or a torch. For
example, the below scene uses point lights for the torches.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/point_scene.png
   :alt: Point scene

   Point scene

Notice that the parts closer to the torches are more brightly lit than
the parts farther away.

Point lights have a couple key properties in the Sandbox that you can
adjust: the position of the light, the color, the intensity, and the
falloff distance. You will see another property called *type* in the
Properties tab, but this changes the point light to a spot or
directional light, so don’t change this for now.

**Remember:** To access an object’s properties, select the object and
click on the *Properties* tab on the right side of the screen, or click
on the appropriate toolbar button.

-  *Position* is not a property unique to point lights, but is
   universal. It is set the same way you would set the position of any
   object: use the drag handles on the object when it is selected, or
   use the Transform property tab to set them manually.

-  The *color* of a light causes any objects receiving the light’s light
   to be tinted this color. In the image above for example, the torches
   cast an orange light. Remember though that color is not additive, but
   multiplicative, meaning that if you shine a blue light on a red
   object it will appear black and not purple. This is the same way real
   light works; just think of how a black light looks on a white versus
   a green shirt.

-  The *intensity* of a light determines how strongly the light
   influences the color of the relevant objects.

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/point_intensity.png
      :alt: Point Intensity

      Point Intensity

   The left light has an intensity of 1, and the right light has an
   intensity of 3. You can see how the more intense light has more
   influence on its surroundings than the less intense light.

-  The *distance* of the light affects how quickly the light’s intensity
   drops off.

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/point_radius.png
      :alt: Point light distance

      Point light distance

   Both of these lights have the same intensity, but the light on the
   right has a distance of 3 versus the other light’s 1. You can see how
   the light on the right extends farther out than the other as a
   result.

That’s all there is to point lights. Easy, right? Now on to directional
lights!

Directional lights
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directional lights are sort of the opposite of point lights. Instead of
light hitting an object from a certain point, it hits an object from a
certain direction. You can think of this as equivalent to a point light
infinitely far away from the scene, so that its rays are parallel. This
is usually used to model the sun, but since the Sandbox already has a
sun you probably won’t use this light type very much.

It is important to note that directional lights are not scoped like
point lights are. Directional lights will shine on the entire scene,
regardless of its position.

An example of a directional light:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/dir-light.gif
   :alt: Directional light

   Directional light

Directional lights have three properties: the direction, the intensity,
and the color.

-  The *direction* is set via the light’s Transform rotation property,
   either by editing it directly or by using the rotation handles as
   seen above.

-  The *intensity* of a directional light is the same as with a point
   light.

-  The *color* is the same as well.

Spot lights
~~~~~~~~~~~

Spot lights in the Sandbox behave just as they do in real life: they
originate at a point and radiate out in a cone shape in a particular
direction. The rest is almost identical to the types of lights we’ve
already discussed. An example scene that uses a spotlight:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/spot_scene.png
   :alt: Spot scene

   Spot scene

Notice that the objects in and around the stage are more brightly lit
than the objects near the sides. This is because the spotlight is aimed
just above the stage.

The spot light has one new property and several old ones:

-  The *spot angle* changes how focused or wide the beam from the spot
   light is. Lower numbers are less focused.

-  *Position*

-  *Direction*

-  *Color*

-  *Intensity*

Lights really are as simple as that. However, you can’t make a proper
scene with just lights, you have to ritz up the objects the light falls
on too. On to materials!

Materials
---------

What exactly distinguishes a snow globe from a trophy baseball? They’re
roughly the same shape and weight, but they are made of very different
materials. Adding many distinct materials to a 3d scene can add texture
and credibility, and with enough attention to detail, can lend the scene
that much-coveted touch of realism.

If you are familiar with node-based material systems such as those in
Blender or Unreal, then you will find the Sandbox a little
underwhelming. The Sandbox is not a platform for photorealistic renders,
nor an advanced game engine. Rather, the graphics are merely another
tool to enable the creativity, collaboration, and education of its
users.

To access an object’s material properties, just select the object and
click the *Material* button (|image1|) in the top toolbar.
Alternatively, you can click on the *Material* tab on the right. Either
will bring up the object’s material editor:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/material_editor.png
   :alt: Material editor

   Material editor

**Note:** This image has all the material properties at default. The
following screenshots however will have all but the demonstrated
property zeroed out to produce a pure effect.

In the following sections we will be examining what each of the widgets
here do, starting with the most basic: diffuse color.

Diffuse color
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A lot of different things go into the color of individual pixels of an
object, such as light color, viewing angle, and shadowing. However, the
base color of an object is not complicated. Clicking on the *Diffuse
Color* palette icon brings up a color chooser:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/color_picker.png
   :alt: Color picker

   Color picker

Moving this color around should produce obvious and immediate results.
Below is a sphere with a pure red diffuse color:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/diffuse_red_ball.png
   :alt: Red ball

   Red ball

Notice that changing the diffuse color does not make the ball solid red;
it still has a light side towards the light and a dark side away from
the light.

Emission color
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Emission color behaves very differently from diffuse color. Emission
generates a pure color, unaffected by shadows or lights. You can see
this in the image below:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/emissive_red_ball.png
   :alt: Red ball

   Red ball

This ball has only a pure red color with no light or dark sides like
with diffuse color. One generally does not use emission by itself
though, but rather in conjunction with other colors to provide a
highlight effect, or to emulate ambient reflections:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/emission_scene.png
   :alt: White ball

   White ball

This ball has a pure white diffuse color, but the slight blue emission
color makes it look like the blue backdrop is reflecting onto it. Subtle
use of this technique can make a scene look much more realistic.

So we’ve learned how to make a flat shaded object. But what if you
wanted to model something shiny? Specular to the rescue!

Specular reflections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This one is a little more complicated. Specular reflections are the dots
of brightness that you see on objects, like a fuzzy reflection. For
example, this sphere:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_example.png
   :alt: Reflective ball

   Reflective ball

This sphere has a solid black diffuse color, but a white specular color.
This causes the white spot, called a *frustrum*, in the direction of the
light source. These frustra (plural of frustrum) are caused by several
different material properties:

-  The *shininess* of an object controls how focused the frustra are.
   The shinier the object is, the smaller and more focused and intense
   the frustra are. A shininess of 0 is the same as diffuse lighting.
   You can see this in the images below:

   |Dull sphere| |Shiny sphere|

   The sphere on the left has a low shininess value, and as a result the
   frustrum is loosely focused, in direct contrast with the sphere on
   the right (high shininess, tight frustrum).

-  The *specular level* indicates how strongly the object reflects the
   light. A value less than 1 will cause a reduction of incoming light,
   and a value greater than 1 will strengthen it.

   |Low intensity| |Mid intensity| |High intensity|

   Seen here from left to right, low intensity (0.5), medium intensity
   (1.0), and high intensity (2.0) specular reflections.

-  The *specular color* is fairly self-explanatory: it sets the color of
   the frustra. Though it’s probably more accurate to describe it as a
   mask; the light color is multiplied by the object’s specular color to
   produce the frustrum color. So a red light with a white specular will
   produce a red frustrum, but the same light with a blue specular will
   produce black. Feel free to fiddle with this until it looks right.

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_color.png
      :alt: Cyan specular

      Cyan specular

   A sphere with a cyan specular reflection color.

Other material properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have already covered the most common material properties, but there
are a couple others that may prove useful at some point.

-  An object’s *alpha* value sets how transparent it is. Use this for
   anything that should be seen through, like glass or a hologram.

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/alpha.png
      :alt: Transparent cube

      Transparent cube

**Note:** By default, the back faces of an object will not be visible
through the transparency, and there is no reliable way to make them
appear. Unfortunately this is a limitation of the rendering engine, and
there are no plans to implement it.

-  The *side* value property affects what is called the *culling* of the
   object. Normally, the rendering engine is optimized not to draw
   objects facing away from the camera, or are out of the frame. For
   example, a cube has six sides, but only three are ever visible at any
   one time. Knowing this, the renderer skips drawing the rear-facing
   faces to save time. This works for closed geometry like a cube, but
   for open geometry like a plane, it breaks down.

   Using the *side* property, you can tell the renderer to draw only the
   front faces (default 0), only the back faces (1), or all faces (2).
   This is useful for the aforementioned open geometry, such as this
   half-pipe:

   |Back culled| |Front culled| |No cull|

   From left to right, back-culled (front-facing only), front-culled
   (back-facing only), no culling (all faces).

   While fixing the culling would seem to be the obvious solution to the
   back-facing transparency issue mentioned previously, it does not work
   reliably and can produce some fairly bizarre effects. See the below
   image, and notice that some back faces are only partially drawn, and
   others are missing entirely:

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/alpha_cull.png
      :alt: Alpha culling

      Alpha culling

-  The *reflect* property is a bit of a misnomer. One would expect it to
   make the object like a mirror and reflect its surroundings. However,
   it is actually closer to an environmental factor. The higher the
   *reflect* property is set, the more of the sky will appear in the
   surface of the object. This is a great effect for outdoor scenes, but
   for indoor scenes I recommend using the
   `emission <#Emission-color>`__ trick I showed you earlier.

   .. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/reflect.png
      :alt: Reflective cube

      Reflective cube

   A highly reflective cube.

We have covered all the major innate properties of an object’s material.
However, there is another large topic that needs to be discussed before
materials are fully covered: textures.

Textures
--------

At its core, texturing is how one maps a two-dimensional image onto a
three-dimensional surface. This can be used for all the same effects
that you can get with the materials in the previous section, but with
infinitely greater detail and a little extra complexity. In the
following sections, we will see how the addition of textures improves
the blank model below:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_none.png
   :alt: Shelter

   Shelter

Before we dive right into texturing though, it is important to talk
about what makes texturing possible: UV coordinates.

A word about UV coordinates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is a complicated topic with a lot of room for nuance, but I shall
attempt to cover the basics. Put simply, textures can be applied because
during the creation of the model, all of the faces of the 3D geometry
were flattened out (*unwrapped*) and mapped to some region on the
texture. This 2D mapping is called “UV” because, since X, Y, and Z are
already used for the 3D space, one needs a different way to specify
texture coordinates, and the community settled on U for the horizontal
and V for the vertical, thus UV coordinates. You can see this mapping in
the following graphic:

|Unwrapping| |UV Map|

In this example, the cube was unwrapped to this classic cross shape with
the bottom of the cube at the intersection, though it could have been
done any way the author chose. In fact, the Sandbox uses a simpler
mapping: all the faces completely overlap, so the whole texture is
displayed on every face. However, neither of these methods are valid for
non-box geometries, like a cylinder or sphere, which is why this topic
can get so complicated. This is not a UV mapping tutorial so I won’t get
into this, but there are plenty of other good tutorials on the topic.

**Note:** If you do not like the way that the texture wraps to the
Sandbox primitive geometries by default, you can add a modifier to
generate configurable UV coordinates for the object. With your object
selected, go to *Create > Modifier > UVMap*. This will add another panel
to your object’s Properties page with various configuration settings to
adjust the texture mapping.

With that said, let’s get started with textures!

Basic texturing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several different types of textures that can be applied in the
Sandbox which we will cover shortly, but they all have properties in
common. To edit these properties, open the Materials panel for your
object, and click on the section on the very bottom labeled “Texture
Layer *x*\ ” where *x* is a number. If there is not a texture layer
already on your object you can click the “Add Layer” button to create
one. Clicking the texture layer will bring up a window similar to this
one:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_properties.png
   :alt: Texture properties

   Texture properties

-  The *image* property contains the URL to the texture. You can access
   this by clicking on the image at the top. This brings up a texture
   library browser from which you can choose a texture, or you can click
   the **+** to specify your own URL (for Dropbox- or Imgur-hosted
   textures)

-  The *alpha* property controls the discard threshold for the texture.
   If a texture has an alpha channel, and the value of that channel for
   a particular pixel falls below the discard threshold, that pixel is
   not drawn and displays whatever is behind it.

-  The *scale* properties allow you to change the apparent size of the
   texture, or inversely, how many times the texture appears on the
   object. Large values produce more copies of smaller textures, small
   positive values produce stretched textures, and negative values
   produce inverted textures.

-  The *offset* properties shift the texture by a given amount in the
   *x* and *y* directions.

-  The *Map To* property changes how the texture is interpreted: as a
   diffuse color, a normal map, a bump map, or a specular map. Light
   maps and environment maps currently do not work though they are on
   the list.

That last property, the *Map To*, is the most important property here,
and the topic of the following sections. Each mode behaves differently,
so we will cover each mode individually. First up is the diffuse mode.

Diffuse textures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Diffuse textures are the basic type of texture. All it does is paint the
image onto the object according to the UV coordinates. Here is the model
above, with just a diffuse texture applied:

|Plain shelter| |Diffuse shelter|

Much better, right? Just this is probably good enough for most
applications, but it can be further improved by adding normal and
specular maps.

Normal maps
~~~~~~~~~~~

Mathematically speaking, a normal vector, usually just called a
*normal*, is the vector perpendicular to a surface at a point. Normally
these are built into the geometry, calculated from the angles of the
vertices, but by using a normal map, you can manually specify the normal
at every point rather than just at the vertices.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/normals.png
   :alt: Normal diagram

   Normal diagram

Just like a diffuse texture sets the color for every point, a normal map
sets the normal for every point. The RGB channels of the texture map
directly to the *xyz* coordinates of the normal vector in the space
tangent to the surface, which is why normal maps tend to look mostly
blue (the *z* coordinate, i.e. straight out from the surface). As a
result, the lighting can be calculated at a higher granularity, causing
apparent pits and bumps in the surface.

This is a very complicated description, but as they say, a picture is
worth a thousand words. Compare the model from earlier with the same
model with a normal map applied.

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/normal_comparison.png
   :alt: Normal comparison

   Normal comparison

You see what a huge difference that makes? The normal affects the
lighting, and the lighting affects our perception, creating apparent
bumps and pits. This is a great way to add extra realism to a scene. The
downside is that normal maps are much harder to author than its
predecessor, the bump map.

Bump maps
~~~~~~~~~

Bump maps also modify the normals of the surface, but instead of mapping
*xyz* vectors directly from the RGB image, bump maps store displacement.
Lighter patches in the bump map indicate high points, and darker parts
indicate low points. The system then uses the 3d model and this relief
map to generate new normals which affect the lighting in the same way as
above.

Since the bump mapping only uses intensity (light/dark), creating a bump
map by hand is quite easy compared to a normal map which uses very
specific calculated RGB values. The downside is that it produces
somewhat fuzzier relief in the surface. This is visible in the image
below:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/bump_vs_normal.png
   :alt: Bump vs Normal mapping

   Bump vs Normal mapping

The left half of this cube is bump mapped, and the right half is normal
mapped. You can see at the edges how the bump map produces more rounded
relief vs the normal map, which has sharper edges.

With bump maps described, the only texture type remaining to be covered
is the specular map.

Specular maps
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Just like diffuse maps set the color and normal maps set the normal,
specular maps set the shininess of each pixel. More specifically, it
sets how intensely the specular color shows through in the object’s
frustra. The map itself is simply a greyscale image that scales the
frustrum intensity per pixel, so creating these by hand is not difficult
if you have the diffuse texture to use as a template.

**Remember:** A frustrum is a non-diffuse reflection of a light source
on a shiny object.

The best example to help visualize this type of map is a rusty metal
object. You want the unrusted parts to be highly shiny but the rust to
be dull. Or perhaps for a brick wall you want shiny bricks with dull
mortar. Or a dirty glass window. These types of effects can be
accomplished with a specular map. This effect is visible in the
following image:

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_specular.png
   :alt: Specular map

   Specular map

Notice how the mottled reflection gives our house a dirty or dilapidated
appearance. This can be highly effective when combined with a normal map
to produce a realistic-looking complicated surface.

So by combining all these techniques, our house now looks quite good!
What a difference a couple textures make!

|Plain house| |Fancy house|

Conclusion
----------

Whew, what a journey! You have been introduced to a lot of material, but
let’s review. You learned about the different types of lights: spot
light, point light, and directional light. You learned a little bit
about how the lights interact with objects in the Materials section.
Finally you learned about the subtle art of the texture.

We did not go into a ton of detail on any of these topics, so if you’re
looking for more information you are welcome to google anything
mentioned in this article. However remember that that information will
not be Sandbox-specific.

I hope you have found this article interesting and informative. If you
have any questions or comments, feel free to post them in the comments
section below, or email me at steve.vergenz.ctr (at) adlnet (dot) gov.
Happy worldbuilding!

.. figure:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/signoff.png
   :alt: Signoff

   Signoff

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. |:)| image:: http://vwf.adlnet.gov/r/wp-includes/images/smilies/icon_smile.gif
.. |image1| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/material.png
.. |Dull sphere| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_dull.png
.. |Shiny sphere| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_shiny.png
.. |Low intensity| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_low_intensity.png
.. |Mid intensity| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_shiny.png
.. |High intensity| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/specular_high_intensity.png
.. |Back culled| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/cull_0.png
.. |Front culled| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/cull_1.png
.. |No cull| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/cull_2.png
.. |Unwrapping| image:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/fe/Cube_Representative_UV_Unwrapping.png/320px-Cube_Representative_UV_Unwrapping.png
   :target: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Cube_Representative_UV_Unwrapping.png
.. |UV Map| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/uv_map.png
.. |Plain shelter| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_none.png
.. |Diffuse shelter| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_diffuse.png
.. |Plain house| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_none.png
.. |Fancy house| image:: ./images/lighting-and-materials/texture_sum.png
