Introduction
------------

The Sandbox allows you to group objects together to make them easier to
use and work with. Groups act much like other objects in the world. You
can select them, copy or paste them, save them to the inventory or set
their permissions. You can even assign code to group itself. Groups are
really just a special kind of hierarchy, where all the group members
children of a single parent.

Making a Group
--------------

To make a group, select several objects. Here, I’ve selected 5 objects
that I wish to group.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image0.png
   :alt: 

Next, choose **Hierarchy->Grouping->Group **\ from the drop down menu.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image1.png
   :alt: 

Once you have clicked this, you’ll see the selection rectangle will
change to green, and a selection glyph will appear. The objects are now
grouped.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image2.png
   :alt: 

**Note: **\ You cannot group objects that already have hierarchal
relationships. For instance, you cannot group a child to its parent.

Breaking a Group
----------------

You can ungroup object by selecting the group root and choosing
**Hierarchy->Grouping->Ungroup**

Open and Closed groups
----------------------

Groups can be either ‘Open’ or ‘Closed’. This setting only affects the
selection logic, but is useful if you need to get inside a group and
work with the objects within it. By default, new groups are closed. When
a group is closed, you cannot select objects within the group, and when
it is open, you can.

Closed groups have a bright green bounding box,

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image3.png
   :alt: 

while open groups have a pale green bounding box.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image4.png
   :alt: 

You can open or close a group by using the dropdown menu.
Hierarchy->Grouping->Open Group.

**Info: **\ To close a group, you must first select the group’s root. Do
this by clicking the ‘\ **Select Parent’ **\ button after selecting a
group member, or click directly on the selection glyph.

Adding to a group
-----------------

Because groups are just a special kind if hierarchy, you can use the
link tool to add an object to a group. Select the object you wish to
add.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image5.png
   :alt: 

Next, select the Link button from the toolbar.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image6.png
   :alt: 

Now, select the group root of the group you wish to attach to. Because
this group is closed, I can click anywhere on the table or a chair. If
the group were open, I would have to click carefully on the selection
glyph. Now, the lamp is attached to the group.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image7.png
   :alt: 

Removing from a group
---------------------

Again, since the group is just a special kind if hierarchy, you can just
use the break link tool to remove an object from its group. Select a
part of the group.

**Info: **\ it’s easier to do this if you open the group first

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image8.png
   :alt: 

Now, choose the break link button from the toolbar.

.. figure:: ./images/working-with-groups/selections.html_Image9.png
   :alt: 

The objects will flash for a moment. When you select the group, you will
now see it contains only the table and the lamp.
